--- PAGE 1 ---
New York State Testing Program
Grade 3
English Language Arts Test
Released Questions
2024
New York State administered the English Language Arts
Tests in April 2024 and is making approximately 75% of the
questions from these tests available for review and use.

--- PAGE 2 ---
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT / THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
New York State Testing Program
Grade 3 English Language Arts
Released Questions from 2024 Exams
Background
As in past years, SED is releasing large portions of the 2024 NYS Grades 3–8 English Language Arts and Mathematics
test materials for review, discussion, and use.
For 2024, included in these released materials are at least 75 percent of the test questions that appeared on the
2024 tests (including all constructed-response questions) that counted toward students’ scores. Additionally, SED is
providing information about the released passages; the associated text complexity for each passage; and a map that
details what learning standards each released question measures and the correct response to each question. These
released materials will help students, families, educators, and the public better understand the tests and the New
York State Education Department’s expectations for students.
Understanding ELA Questions
Multiple-Choice Questions
Multiple-choice questions are designed to assess the New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards in
English Language Arts. These questions ask students to analyze different aspects of a given text, including central
idea, style elements, character and plot development, and vocabulary. Almost all questions, including vocabulary
questions, will be answered correctly only if the student comprehends and makes use of the whole passage.
For multiple-choice questions, students select the correct response from four answer choices. Multiple-choice
questions assess reading standards in a variety of ways. Some ask students to analyze aspects of text or vocabulary.
Many questions require students to combine skills. For example, questions may ask students to identify a segment of
text that best supports the central idea. To answer these questions correctly, a student must first comprehend the
central idea and then show understanding of how that idea is supported. Questions tend to require more than rote
recall or identification.
Two-Credit Constructed-Response Questions
Two-credit constructed-response questions are designed to assess New York State P–12 Reading and Language
Standards. These are single questions in which a student uses textual evidence to support his or her answer to an
inferential question. These questions ask the student to make an inference (a claim, position, or conclusion) based on
their analysis of the passage, and then provide two pieces of text-based evidence to support their answer.
The purpose of the two-credit constructed-response questions is to assess a student’s ability to comprehend and
analyze text. In responding to these questions, students are expected to write in complete sentences. Responses
require no more than three complete sentences. The rubric used for evaluating two-credit constructed-response
questions can be found in the grade-level Educator Guides at https://www.nysed.gov/state-assessment/
grades-3-8-ela-math-and-science-test-manuals.

--- PAGE 3 ---
New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards Alignment
The alignment to the New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards for English Language Arts is intended
to identify the analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question. However, some questions measure
proficiencies described in multiple standards, including writing and additional reading and language standards. For
example, two-credit and four-credit constructed-response questions require students to first conduct the analyses
described in the mapped standard and then produce written responses that are rated based on writing
standards. To gain greater insight into the measurement focus for constructed-response questions, please refer to
the rubrics.
These Released Questions Do Not Comprise a “Mini Test”
To ensure it is possible to develop future tests, some content must remain secure. This document is not intended
to be representative of the entire test, to show how operational tests look, or to provide information about how
teachers should administer the test; rather, its purpose is to provide an overview of how the test reflects the demands
of the New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards.
The released questions do not represent the full spectrum of the standards assessed on the State tests, nor do they
represent the full spectrum of how the standards should be taught and assessed in the classroom. It should not be
assumed that a particular standard will be measured by an identical question in future assessments.

--- PAGE 4 ---
2024 Grade 3 ELA Test Text Complexity Metrics for
Released Questions
Selecting high-quality, grade-appropriate passages requires both objective text
complexity metrics and expert judgment. For the Grades 3–8 assessments based on the
New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards for English Language Arts, both
quantitative and qualitative rubrics are used to determine the complexity of the texts and
their appropriate placement within a grade-level ELA exam.
Quantitative measures of text complexity are used to measure aspects of text complexity
that are difficult for a human reader to evaluate when examining a text. These aspects
include word frequency, word length, sentence length, and text cohesion. These aspects
are efficiently measured by computer programs. While quantitative text complexity
metrics are a helpful start, they are not definitive.
Qualitative measures are a crucial complement to quantitative measures. Using
qualitative measures of text complexity involves making an informed decision about the
difficulty of a text in terms of one or more factors discernible to a human reader applying
trained judgment to the task. To qualitatively determine the complexity of a text, NYS
educators use a rubric composed of five factors; four of these factors are required and
one factor is optional. The required criteria are: meaning, text structure, language
features, and knowledge demands. The optional factor, graphics, is used only if a graphic
appears in the text.
To make the final determination as to whether a text is at grade-level and thus
appropriate to be included on a Grades 3–8 assessment, New York State uses a two-step
review process, which is an industry best-practice. First, all prospective passages undergo
quantitative text complexity analysis using three text complexity measures. If at least two
of the three measures suggest that the passage is grade-appropriate, the passage then
moves to the second step, which is the qualitative review using the text-complexity
rubrics. Only passages that are determined appropriate by at least two of three
quantitative measures of complexity and are determined appropriate by the qualitative
measure of complexity are deemed appropriate for use on the exam.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Text Complexity Metrics for 2024 Grade 3 Passages
Word
Passage Title Count
elixeL
diacniK-hcselF
SOTA
Qualitative
Review
Excerpt from Crazy About Clouds 509 550 2.4 3.37 Appropriate
Excerpt from The Little Red Lighthouse
618 530 2.3 3.8 Appropriate
and the Great Gray Bridge
Excerpt from Apple Day 528 580 3.2 4.27 Appropriate
Excerpt from Hide with the Ladybugs 580 550 3.3 3.13 Appropriate
New York State 2024 Quantitative Text Complexity Chart for Assessment and Curriculum
To determine if a text’s quantitative complexity is at the appropriate grade level, New
York State uses the table below. In cases where a text is excerpted from a large work, only
the complexity of the excerpt that students see on the test is measured, not the large
work, so it is possible that the complexity of a book might be above or below grade level,
but the text used on the assessment is at grade level. Because the measurement of text
complexity is inexact, quantitative measures of complexity are defined by grade band
rather than by individual grade level and then paired with the qualitative review by an
educator.
Degrees of
Grade Reading The Lexile Reading
Band ATOS Power Flesch-Kincaid Framework Maturity SourceRater
2nd–3rd 2.75 – 5.14 42 – 54 1.98 – 5.34 420 – 820 3.53 – 6.13 0.05 – 2.48
4th–5th 4.97 – 7.03 52 – 60 4.51 – 7.73 740 – 1010 5.42 – 7.92 0.84 – 5.75
6th–8th 7.00 – 9.98 57 – 67 6.51 – 10.34 925 – 1185 7.04 – 9.57 4.11 – 10.66
9th–10th 9.67 – 12.01 62 – 72 8.32 – 12.12 1050 – 1335 8.41 – 10.81 9.02 – 13.93
11th–12th 11.20 – 14.10 67 – 74 10.34 – 14.20 1185 – 1385 9.57 – 12.00 12.30 – 14.50
Source: Student Achievement Partners

--- PAGE 6 ---
GRADE 3 ELA SESSION 1
Name: __________________________________________________
New York State
Testing Program
English Language Arts Test
Session 1
3
Grade
Spring 2024
RELEASED QUESTIONS
1 NOISSES ALE 3 EDARG

--- PAGE 7 ---
Excerpt from Crazy About Clouds by Rena Korb. Used with permission of ABDO Publishing via Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from The Little Red Lighthouse and the Great Gray Bridge by Hildegarde H. Swift and Lynd Ward. Copyright © 1970 by Hildegarde
Hoyt Swift and Lynd Ward. Used with permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company via Copyright Clearance Center.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by NWEA, a division of HMH, 14720 Energy Way,
Apple Valley, MN 55124. Copyright © 2024 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 1

--- PAGE 8 ---
Session 1
TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some ideas to help you do your best:
• Read the whole passage before you answer the questions. Most questions will only make
sense after you read the whole passage.
• You might need to read the passage more than once to answer a question.
• Read each question carefully. Take your time.
• A question may include a quote from a passage. You might need to review both the
quote and the whole passage to answer the question.
When you write your answers
• make sure to answer the whole question;
• use examples or details from the text;
• write in complete sentences; and
• use correct spelling, grammar, capitalization, and punctuation.
Session 1 Page 1

--- PAGE 9 ---
Read this passage. Then answer questions 13 through 18.
Excerpt from Crazy About Clouds
by Rena Korb
1 Look up at the sky. Do you see any clouds today?
2 Look! ere’s one shaped like a fluffy, white bunny. A dark gray one
floats by like a jellyfish.
Tiny, Floating Drops
3 Clouds look different. But they are all made of the same stuff—water.
4 Clouds form when tiny drops of water gather in the sky. Tiny chunks of
ice make up clouds, too.
5 e tiny drops of water come together. ey form heavier and heavier
drops. Sometimes, the drops get too heavy to float.
6 Splat! Rain pours from the clouds. Or you might see drizzle, mist, or
snow.
drizzle = light rain
mist = tiny drops of water that hang in the air
7 Clouds may look light and fluffy. But even the water in a small cloud
weighs more than 500 tons. at’s about as heavy as 100 elephants!
Changing Clouds
8 Watch a cloud closely. You will see it change before your very eyes.
9 Clouds can change shapes and sizes. ey can look bright white or dark
gray. Have you ever seen pink clouds at sunset?
10 Clouds dip and dance as the wind pushes them across the sky.
GO ON
Page 12 Session 1

--- PAGE 10 ---
11 Some clouds travel as fast as race cars!
12 A cloud can speed along at 100 miles per hour (160 km/h).
High Clouds, Low Clouds
13 Scientists group clouds by where they are seen in the sky. High clouds
sail with the jumbo jets. Birds fly through low clouds.
jumbo = very large
14 Other clouds float in the middle, and some move up and down.
15 Have you ever walked by a lake on a cool morning? e fog can be very
thick. You can barely see the road ahead of you!
16 Fog is actually a cloud that creeps along the ground.
creeps = moves slowly
17 Cool weather can bring fog. As the day warms up, fog clears away.
Types of Clouds
18 Scientists also group clouds by how they look. Let’s explore a few
clouds.
19 Stratus clouds look like a gray blanket over the sky. ey oen gather in
cool weather. ese clouds mean rain may soon be falling.
20 Have you ever seen bright cotton balls in the sky? ese are cumulus
clouds.
21 ey mostly dri along on a fine, sunny day.
22 Very high above your head float cirrus clouds. eir long tails curve
through the sky.
23 When you see these clouds, the weather might soon change.
24 Run for cover!
GO ON
Session 1 Page 13

--- PAGE 11 ---
25 Dark cumulonimbus clouds are gathering. ese clouds cause powerful
storms.
26 Cumulonimbus clouds usually only stay in the sky for about an hour.
As they break open, they can let out millions of buckets of water.
Study the Clouds
27 Will it rain? Is a snowstorm coming? Clouds give clues about what the
weather will be like.
28 Scientists study clouds to tell what kind of day you’ll have tomorrow.
29 Cloudy days are usually cooler than clear days. But cloudy nights are a
little bit warmer than clear nights.
30 You can study the clouds, too. What types of clouds do you see? Can
you guess the weather ahead?
31 No matter what, you are sure to find many wonderful shapes driing in
the sky.
GO ON
Page 14 Session 1

--- PAGE 12 ---
e phrase “change before your very eyes” in paragraph 8 suggests that clouds
13
A can only be seen up close
B can look strange to others
C can make it difficult for you to see
D can become different while you watch
What claim does the author make about cumulus clouds?
14
A ey look like bright cotton balls in the sky.
B ey form only when it is windy for many hours.
C ey show that the weather might soon change.
D ey look pink when they form at sunset.
In which section of the passage can the reader find information about how clouds
15
are made?
A “Tiny, Floating Drops”
B “Changing Clouds”
C “Types of Clouds”
D “Study the Clouds”
GO ON
Session 1 Page 15

--- PAGE 13 ---
Which sentence from the passage shows a cause-and-effect relationship?
16
A “Clouds can change shapes and sizes.” (paragraph 9)
“Other clouds float in the middle, and some move up and down.”
B
(paragraph 14)
C “As the day warms up, fog clears away.” (paragraph 17)
“Scientists study clouds to tell what kind of day you’ll have tomorrow.”
D
(paragraph 28)
Which detail best shows how the author feels about clouds?
17
A “Some clouds travel as fast as race cars!” (paragraph 11)
B “You can barely see the road ahead of you!” (paragraph 15)
C “. . . cloudy nights are a little bit warmer than clear . . .” (paragraph 29)
D “. . . you are sure to find many wonderful shapes . . .” (paragraph 31)
Which detail would be most important to include in a summary of the passage?
18
A Some clouds can look like shapes of animals.
B Clouds form when drops of water come together.
C Clouds can appear on warm days and on cool days.
D Birds fly through clouds that are low in the sky.
GO ON
Page 16 Session 1

--- PAGE 14 ---
Read this story. Then answer questions 19 through 25.
Lighthouses were once lit by gas. A gas lighthouse on the Hudson River
closed and later became a park aer the George Washington Bridge was
built.
Excerpt from e Little Red
Lighthouse and the Great Gray Bridge
by Hildegarde H. Swi and Lynd Ward
1 Once upon a time a little lighthouse was built on a sharp point of the
shore by the Hudson River. . . .
2 Behind it lay New York City where the people lived.
3 Before it sailed the boats on which the people rode. Up and down, up
and down, sailed the boats. On and on and on rolled the river. All the way
from Lake Tear of the Clouds, high up in the mountains, came the Hudson
River. It rolled down the mountains. It rolled and rolled and rolled. It rolled
past Albany. It rolled past New York. And it went on forever looking for the
sea.
4 Now the boats on the river talked to the little red lighthouse as they
passed.
5 “Hoot, hoot, hoot! How are you?” said the big steamer, with its deep,
throaty whistle. . . .
6 By day the little red lighthouse did not answer. . . .
7 But every night, just at fall of dark, a man came to tend the little red
lighthouse. He took out his jingling keys. He unlocked the small red door in
its side. He climbed its steep and winding stairs, up, up, up, to the very top.
He took off the thick white cap that let it sleep by day. He turned on the gas
with a funny small black key.
8 Up, up, up, flowed the gas from the six red tanks below.
GO ON
Session 1 Page 17

--- PAGE 15 ---
9 en the little red lighthouse spoke out plainly. Flash! Flash! Flash! . . .
10 It felt big and useful and important. What would the boats do without
me? it thought.
11 It felt VERY, VERY PROUD.
12 e boats saw the light and were safe. e boats saw it, and they kept to
the channel. e boats were grateful to the little red lighthouse. . . .
channel = deepest part of a river or harbor
13 Why, I am MASTER OF THE RIVER, it thought.
14 en one day a gang of workmen came and began to dig. . . .
15 Every day it watched the strange new gray thing beside it grow and
grow. Huge towers seemed to touch the sky. Strong loops of steel swept
across the river. How big it was! How wonderful! How powerful! A great
gray bridge, spanning the Hudson River from shore to shore. It made the
little red lighthouse feel very, very small.
spanning = going across
16 en one night a great beam of light flashed from the top of the nearest
gray tower. . . .
17 Now I am needed no longer, thought the little red lighthouse. My light
is so little and this one so big! . . .
18 en in the middle of the night there came a storm. e wind moaned.
e waves beat against the shore. . . .
19 en the great gray bridge called to the little red lighthouse: “Little
brother, where is your light?”
GO ON
Page 18 Session 1

--- PAGE 16 ---
20 “Am I a brother of yours, bridge?” wondered the lighthouse. “Your light
was so bright that I thought mine was not needed anymore.”
21 “I call to the airplanes,” cried the bridge. “I flash to the ships of the air.
But you are still master of the river. Quick, let your light shine again. Each to
his own place, little brother!”
22 So the little red lighthouse tried to shine once more, but though it tried
and tried and tried, it could not turn itself on. . . .
23 But at last it heard the door opening far below. At last it heard steps
rushing up the stairs. . . .
24 Now the little red lighthouse knew that it was needed. . . .
25 It sent a long, bright, flashing ray out into the night. . . .
26 And now beside the great beacon of the bridge, the small beam of the
lighthouse still flashes.
beacon = guiding light
27 Beside the towering gray bridge the lighthouse still bravely stands.
ough it knows now that it is little, it is still VERY, VERY PROUD.
GO ON
Session 1 Page 19

--- PAGE 17 ---
Which event would be most important to include in a summary of the story?
19
A A man takes care of the lighthouse and uses a small key to start its light.
B A boat greets the lighthouse in the day but the lighthouse does not answer.
A terrible storm comes in the night and the bridge reminds the lighthouse
C
why it is needed.
A group of workers come to the Hudson River and begin digging and
D
building along the shore.
How are the details in paragraphs 1 through 6 important to the story?
20
A e paragraphs explain the main problem to be solved in the story.
B e paragraphs introduce the setting and the main character of the story.
C e paragraphs show why later events will come to happen in the story.
e paragraphs hint at how the characters will change over time in the
D
story.
How does the building of the great gray bridge affect the little red lighthouse?
21
A e bridge makes the lighthouse feel like it is not useful anymore.
B e bridge makes the lighthouse feel happy to have help with its job.
C e bridge shows the lighthouse new ways to help the people of the city.
D e bridge blocks out the light of the lighthouse so it is not seen by boats.
GO ON
Page 20 Session 1

--- PAGE 18 ---
e great gray bridge believes that the little red lighthouse
22
A can help it send lights into the air
B should be moved to a different place
C is too small to be helpful in an emergency
D must continue to do its job for the boats
Lighthouses are important because they guide boats. ey can help keep boats safe
23
when weather is bad or water is dangerous. Which detail best shows how this idea
connects to the events in the story?
“All the way from Lake Tear of the Clouds, high up in the mountains, came
A
the Hudson River.” (paragraph 3)
“Now the boats on the river talked to the little red lighthouse as they
B
passed.” (paragraph 4)
“He took off the thick white cap that let it sleep by day. He turned on the
C
gas with a funny small black key.” (paragraph 7)
“e boats saw the light and were safe. e boats saw it, and they kept to
D
the channel.” (paragraph 12)
GO ON
Session 1 Page 21

--- PAGE 19 ---
is question is worth 2 credits.
24
What theme is best supported by paragraphs 17 through 25 of “Excerpt from e
Little Red Lighthouse and the Great Gray Bridge”? Use two details from the story to
27
sThupisp qourets ytioounr i sr ewsoprothn s2e c.redits.
How does the illustration add to the reader’s understanding of “Pill Bugs”? Use two details from the
passage to support your response.
Write your response for this question in your separate Session 1 Answer Booklet.
Writing on this page will not be scored.
is question is worth 2 credits.
25
In “Excerpt from e Little Red Lighthouse and the Great Gray Bridge,” why does the
little red lighthouse feel proud? Use two details from the story to support your
This question is worth 2 credits.
27
response.
How does the illustration add to the reader’s understanding of “Pill Bugs”? Use two details from the
passage to support your response.
This question is worth 2 credits.
28
WhWatr iist ea ymoauinr irdeesap oofn psaer afgorra pthhsi s2 qthureosutgiohn 4 iinn “yPoiull rB suegps”a?r Uatsee Stweoss dioetna i1ls Afronmsw theer pBaossoakglee tto.
support your response.
Writing on this page will not be scored.
Write your response for this question in your separate Session 1 Answer Booklet.
Writing on this page will not be scored.
This question is worth 2 credits.
28
STOP
What is a main idea of paragraphs 2 through 4 in “Pill Bugs”? Use two details from the passage to
Pages u2p2port your response. Session 1
GO ON
SECURE W MA r T it E e R I y AL o S u r response for this questio S n e s in s i y o o n u 1 r F se o p rm ar a A t e 3 Session 1 Answer BooklePta. ge 1
All rights reserved. No part of this booklet may be
reproduced or transmitted by any means.
Writing on this page will not be scored.
GO ON
SECURE MATERIALS Session 1 Form A 3 Page 1
All rights reserved. No part of this booklet may be
reproduced or transmitted by any means.

--- PAGE 20 ---
Grade 3
English Language Arts Test
Session 1
Spring 2024

--- PAGE 21 ---
GRADE 3 ELA SESSION 2
Name: __________________________________________________
New York State
Testing Program
English Language Arts Test
Session 2
3
Grade
Spring 2024
RELEASED QUESTIONS
2 NOISSES ALE 3 EDARG

--- PAGE 22 ---
“Apple Day” by Kimberly Long Cockroft, Spider, September 1, 2015, Vol. 22 Issue 7. Copyright © 2015 by Cricket Media. Used with
permission of Carus Publishing Company via Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from Hide with the Ladybugs by Karen Latchana Kenney. Copyright © 2011 by ABDO Consulting Group, Inc. Published by Magic
Wagon. Used with permission of ABDO Publishing Group via Copyright Clearance Center.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by NWEA, a division of HMH, 14720 Energy Way,
Apple Valley, MN 55124. Copyright © 2024 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 2

--- PAGE 23 ---
Session 2
TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some ideas to help you do your best:
• Read the whole passage before you answer the questions. Most questions will only
make sense after you read the whole passage.
• You might need to read the passage more than once to answer a question.
• Read each question carefully. Take your time.
• A question may include a quote from a passage. You might need to review both the
quote and the whole passage to answer the question.
When you write your answers
• make sure to answer the whole question;
• use examples or details from the text;
• write in complete sentences; and
• use correct spelling, grammar, capitalization, and punctuation.
Session 2 Page 1

--- PAGE 24 ---
Read this story. Then answer questions 26 through 31.
Molly is in the apple orchard picking apples with her dad.
Excerpt from Apple Day
by Kimberly Long Cockro
1 Sunlight filters through the branches, dappling Molly’s hands as she
twists each stem. She is careful to pick only the best apples. Every year, her
family’s applesauce is the best in Montana—well, almost the best. Last year,
their jar of special McIntosh applesauce won the red ribbon at the state fair.
2 ere’s just something missing from our sauce, Molly muses as she
picks. If only they could figure out what it is, they might win the blue ribbon
this year. Molly strains for an apple just out of reach and—CRASH—
tumbles, dizzy, to the ground. It feels like a bobcat has wrapped his paws
around her legs.
3 But it’s not a bobcat. It’s Sam, her messy little cousin who lives next
door.
4 “Molly, I came to pick apples, too!” He waves an old, battered purse
above his head.
5 Sam’s mom waves from the edge of the orchard, her hair still in curlers.
Dad waves back and calls, “We’ll watch him this morning!” . . .
6 “Go pick apples over there,” Molly snaps. She points to an ancient,
twisted apple tree. Nobody knows what kinds of apples it grows, but they are
tiny and too tart to eat.
7 Sam doesn’t care. He fills his mom’s old purse with them, then stuffs his
raincoat pockets full, too. . . .
8 en Dad calls, “Time to sauce!”
9 Sam lis up his bulging purse. “I picked a bunch!”
10 Molly sighs. She hopes Sam will stay out of the way.
GO ON
Page 2 Session 2

--- PAGE 25 ---
11 At home, Dad cinches the iron clamps of the applesauce mill to the
table while Molly rinses the apples.
12 “ey’re beauties,” Mom says, and Molly smiles with pride. en into
the big pot on the stove they go.
13 Suddenly, before she can stop him, Sam shakes the purse of tiny, sour
apples into the pot, too.
14 “No!” Molly cries, reaching into the pot to pull out Sam’s apples.
15 “It’s OK,” Dad chuckles. “I know a secret about good applesauce.” . . .
16 Molly isn’t so sure.
17 While the apples soen in the pot, filling the kitchen with sweet steam,
Sam bangs on the empty bowl with a spoon and belts out a song about
Apple Day. . . .
18 Molly and Dad take turns cranking the handle, smashing the apples
into sauce. Sam tries, too, but it is too hard for him. e sauce slips down
into the bowl, golden and smooth. A pile of seeds and skin slip out the back
of the mill, and Molly empties them onto the compost heap, a treat for the
bees.
compost heap = a pile of food and plant waste
19 Finally, all the apples, even Sam’s tiny tart ones, have been made into a
huge bowl of applesauce. Dad holds a spoon to Molly’s lips.
20 Molly screws up her mouth. She sticks out her tongue to taste just a
little. en she gobbles the whole bite. “Wow!”
21 Dad’s eyes twinkle. “e secret to really good sauce is making it from
different kinds of apples.” He ruffles Sam’s hair. “We may even have a chance
at that blue ribbon this year.”
GO ON
Session 2 Page 3

--- PAGE 26 ---
22 “Who would have known that you had the missing ingredient?” Molly
asks her cousin.
23 Sam grins, licking sauce from his fingers. “I love Apple Day!”
24 Molly smiles. “Me, too, Sam.”
GO ON
Page 4 Session 2

--- PAGE 27 ---
Which sentence best shows a theme of the story?
26
A Goals can be reached through hard work.
B Good things happen to people who tell the truth.
C Trusting what others do can be rewarding.
D e happiest moments in life are those spent with family.
What does the word “muses” mean as it is used in paragraph 2?
27
A feels strange
B becomes amazed
C thinks deeply
D feels upset
In paragraph 3 of the story, whose thoughts are being shown?
28
A Sam’s
B Molly’s
C Dad’s
D Mom’s
GO ON
Session 2 Page 5

--- PAGE 28 ---
Read these sentences from paragraph 20.
29
Molly screws up her mouth. She sticks out her tongue to taste
just a little.
Which sentence best explains why Molly acts this way?
A She is certain that the applesauce will win the blue ribbon.
B She thinks that the applesauce will taste bad.
C She is angry at Sam for putting his apples in the applesauce.
D She wants to try the applesauce before Sam tries it.
Which quote from the story best shows that Molly has learned a lesson?
30
A “Molly sighs. She hopes Sam will stay out of the way.” (paragraph 10)
“ ‘ey’re beauties,’ Mom says, and Molly smiles with pride.”
B
(paragraph 12)
C “en she gobbles the whole bite. ‘Wow!’ ” (paragraph 20)
D “We may even have a chance at that blue ribbon this year.” (paragraph 21)
Which sentence best shows how Molly’s feelings about Sam change in the story?
31
A “It’s Sam, her messy little cousin who lives next door.” (paragraph 3)
B “ ‘Go pick apples over there,’ Molly snaps.” (paragraph 6)
“ ‘No!’ Molly cries, reaching into the pot to pull out Sam’s apples.”
C
(paragraph 14)
“Who would have known that you had the missing ingredient?”
D
(paragraph 22)
GO ON
Page 6 Session 2

--- PAGE 29 ---
Read this passage. Then answer questions 32 through 34.
Excerpt from Hide with the Ladybugs
by Karen Latchana Kenney
Lovely Ladybug
1 Crawl, crawl, crawl. A ladybug looks like a colorful, crawling bump.
From the side, it’s shaped like half a pea. en it opens its wings. It’s gone in
a second.
2 More than 5,000 kinds of ladybugs crawl and fly around Earth.
Ladybugs gather in gardens and forests. ey live almost everywhere except
for very cold places.
3 Ladybugs are a kind of beetle. Even males are called ladybugs!
Ladybugs are also called lady beetles or ladybird beetles.
Growing Ladybugs
4 In the spring, a female ladybug crawls on the underside of a leaf. She is
looking for a safe place to lay eggs. Here, the eggs will be safe from hungry
birds or insects flying above.
5 e mother ladybug lays her eggs. en she flies away. e tiny, yellow
eggs look like shiny jellybeans. A mother ladybug doesn’t just lay her eggs
anywhere. She chooses a place with lots of tiny bugs called aphids. When the
eggs hatch, her young will have plenty to eat.
6 A few days later, larvae hatch from the eggs. ese tiny creatures have
legs but no wings. ey are very hungry! ey hunt for aphids. A larva can
eat 400 aphids before it is three weeks old!
creatures = animals
7 e larvae are growing quickly. To grow, a larva breaks out of its old
skin. Underneath it has new, bigger skin. is is called molting.
GO ON
Session 2 Page 7

--- PAGE 30 ---
8 Next, a larva finds a safe place and attaches to a leaf. A hard cover
surrounds the larva. It becomes a pupa. Inside the cover, the pupa grows
and changes. . . .
attaches to = joins itself with
9 Aer a few days, an adult ladybug climbs out of the hard casing. Its
body is so and pale. It does not have spots.
10 e ladybug’s skin soon hardens into a shell. is shell protects the
ladybug. Some ladybugs slowly turn red. eir black spots appear.
11 Ladybugs can be orange, yellow, pink, or black. Some have spots. Some
are spotless, and some have stripes.
Flying and Feeling
12 Soon, ladybugs are flying. Each one has two sets of wings. Unlike other
insects, beetles have elytra. e elytra are hard, front wings. ey cover a
pair of thin, see-through back wings.
13 To fly, the ladybug opens its front wings. en the thin wings flutter.
ey li the ladybug into the air.
flutter = move quickly
14 e two elytra are a mirror image of each other. ey have the exact
same color and spots.
15 Ladybugs cannot see faraway things well. How do they find food?
16 A ladybug uses its two antennae to explore its world. Like wands, they
wave in all directions. ey can feel, smell, and taste.
GO ON
Page 8 Session 2

--- PAGE 31 ---
Helpful Bugs
17 Ladybugs eat aphids or scale bugs. ese tiny creatures are pests. ey
harm crops. at’s why farmers and gardeners love to see ladybugs crawling
around. More ladybugs means fewer pests. An adult ladybug can eat 75
aphids a day! A few kinds of ladybugs eat plant parts. Some eat pollen, the
sticky dust on flowers.
Staying Safe
18 e air has a chill. Winter is coming. Ladybugs find a dry place away
from the wind. It can be in a house or in a dead tree. Sometimes, they form
large groups.
19 e ladybugs stay there through winter. ey do not eat anything. ey
could stay like this for nine months.
New Lives
20 When the air is warm again, the ladybugs go back outside. ey fly
around the garden. ey hunt for aphids. e females lay eggs. New
ladybugs begin their lives.
GO ON
Session 2 Page 9

--- PAGE 32 ---
is question is worth 2 credits.
32
In “Excerpt from Hide with the Ladybugs,” how does paragraph 5 connect to
paragraph 6? Use two details from the passage to support your response.
GO ON
Page 10 Session 2

--- PAGE 33 ---
is question is worth 2 credits.
33
e cold can be dangerous for animals, so they find ways to stay safe in bad
weather. How does “Excerpt from Hide with the Ladybugs” develop this idea? Use
two details from the passage to support your response.
GO ON
Session 2 Page 11

--- PAGE 34 ---
is question is worth 2 credits.
34
How does the diagram “A Ladybug’s Body” better help the reader’s understanding of
the passage? Use two details from the passage to support your response.
STOP
Page 12 Session 2

--- PAGE 35 ---
Grade 3
English Language Arts Test
Session 2
Spring 2024

--- PAGE 36 ---
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
2024 English Language Arts Tests Map to the Standards
Grade 3
Multiple Choice
Constructed Response Questions
Questions
Question Type Key Points Standard Subscore Percentage of Students P-Value
Average
Who Answered Correctly (Average Points Earned ÷
Points Earned
(P-Value) Total Possible Points)
Session 1
13 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.4 Reading 0.65
14 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.8 Reading 0.6
15 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.5 Reading 0.62
16 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.3 Reading 0.4
17 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.6 Reading 0.55
18 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.2 Reading 0.51
19 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.2 Reading 0.48
20 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.5 Reading 0.42
21 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.3 Reading 0.53
22 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.8 Reading 0.54
23 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.9 Reading 0.56
24 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.2 Writing to Sources 0.96 0.48
25 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.3 Writing to Sources 1.03 0.51
Session 2
26 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.2 Reading 0.38
27 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.4 Reading 0.56
28 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.6 Reading 0.65
29 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.3 Reading 0.57
30 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.2 Reading 0.43
31 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.3 Reading 0.56
32 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.3 Writing to Sources 1.24 0.62
33 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.9 Writing to Sources 1 0.5
34 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.7 Writing to Sources 1.01 0.51
*This item map is intended to identify the primary analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question on the 2024 operational ELA test. However,
each constructed-response question measures proficiencies described in multiple standards, including writing and additional reading and language standards.
For example, two-point and four-point constructed-response questions require students to first conduct the analyses described in the mapped standard and
then produce written responses that are rated based on writing standards. To gain greater insight into the measurement focus for constructed-response questions, please
refer to the rubrics shown in the Educator Guides.

