--- PAGE 1 ---
New York State Testing Program
Grade 3
English Language Arts Test
Released Questions
2025
New York State administered the English Language Arts Tests in
Spring 2025 and is making approximately 75% of the questions
from these tests available for review and use.

--- PAGE 2 ---
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT / THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
New York State Testing Program
Grade 3 English Language Arts
Released Questions from 2025 Exams
Background
As in past years, the New York State Education Department (NYSED) is releasing large portions of the 2025 NYS Grades
3–8 English Language Arts and Mathematics test materials for review, discussion, and use.
For 2025, at least 75 percent of the test questions that appeared on the 2025 tests and counted toward students'
scores are included in these released materials. This includes all constructed-response questions. Additionally, NYSED
is providing information about the released passages; the associated text complexity for each passage; and a map
that details what learning standards each released question measures and the correct response to each question.
These released materials will help students, families, educators, and the public better understand the tests and
NYSED’s expectations for students.
Understanding English Language Arts Questions
Multiple-Choice Questions
Multiple-choice questions are designed to assess the New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards in
English Language Arts (ELA). These questions ask students to analyze different aspects of a given text, including
central idea, style elements, character and plot development, and vocabulary. Almost all questions, including
vocabulary questions, will be answered correctly only if the student comprehends and makes use of the whole
passage.
For multiple-choice questions, students select the correct response from four answer choices. Multiple-choice
questions assess reading standards in a variety of ways. Some ask students to analyze aspects of text or vocabulary.
Many questions require students to combine skills. For example, questions may ask students to identify a segment of
text that best supports the central idea. To answer these questions correctly, a student must first comprehend the
central idea and then show understanding of how that idea is supported. Questions tend to require more than rote
recall or identification.
Two-Credit Constructed-Response Questions
Two-credit constructed-response questions are designed to assess New York State P–12 Reading and Language
Standards. These are single questions in which a student uses textual evidence to support their answer to an
inferential question. These questions ask the student to make an inference (a claim, position, or conclusion) based on
their analysis of the passage, and then provide two pieces of text-based evidence to support their answer.
The purpose of the two-credit constructed-response questions is to assess a student’s ability to comprehend and
analyze text. In responding to these questions, students are expected to write in complete sentences. Responses
require no more than three complete sentences. The rubric used for evaluating two-credit constructed-response
questions can be found in the grade-level Educator Guides at https://www.nysed.gov/state-assessment/ grades-3-8-
ela-math-and-science-test-manuals.

--- PAGE 3 ---
New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards Alignment
The alignment to the New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards for ELA is intended to identify the
analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question. However, some questions measure proficiencies
described in multiple standards, including writing and additional reading and language standards. For example, two-
credit and four-credit constructed-response questions require students to first conduct the analyses described in the
mapped standard and then produce written responses that are rated based on writing standards. To gain greater
insight into the measurement focus for constructed-response questions, please refer to the rubrics.
These Released Questions Do Not Comprise a “Mini Test”
To ensure it is possible to develop future tests, some content must remain secure. This document is not intended to
be representative of the entire test, to show how operational tests look, or to provide information about how
teachers should administer the test; rather, its purpose is to provide an overview of how the test reflects the demands
of the New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards.
The released questions do not represent the full spectrum of the standards assessed on the State tests, nor do they
represent the full spectrum of how the standards should be taught and assessed in the classroom. It should not be
assumed that a particular standard will be measured by an identical question in future assessments.

--- PAGE 4 ---
2025 Grade 3 ELA Test Text Complexity Metrics for
Released Questions
Selecting high-quality, grade-appropriate passages requires both objective text
complexity metrics and expert judgment. For the Grades 3–8 assessments based on the
New York State P-12 Next Generation Learning Standards for English Language Arts, both
quantitative and qualitative rubrics are used to determine the complexity of the texts and
their appropriate placement within a grade-level ELA exam.
Quantitative measures of text complexity are used to measure aspects of text complexity
that are difficult for a human reader to evaluate when examining a text. These aspects
include word frequency, word length, sentence length, and text cohesion. These aspects
are efficiently measured by computer programs. While quantitative text complexity
metrics are a helpful start, they are not definitive.
Qualitative measures are a crucial complement to quantitative measures. Using
qualitative measures of text complexity involves making an informed decision about the
difficulty of a text in terms of one or more factors discernible to a human reader applying
trained judgment to the task. To qualitatively determine the complexity of a text, NYS
educators use a rubric composed of five factors; four of these factors are required and
one factor is optional. The required criteria are: meaning, text structure, language
features, and knowledge demands. The optional factor, graphics, is used only if a graphic
appears in the text.
To make the final determination as to whether a text is at grade level and thus
appropriate to be included on a Grades 3–8 assessment, New York State uses a two-step
review process, which is an industry best practice. First, all prospective passages undergo
quantitative text complexity analysis using three text complexity measures. If at least two
of the three measures suggest that the passage is grade-appropriate, the passage then
moves to the second step, which is the qualitative review using the text-complexity
rubrics. Only passages that are determined appropriate by at least two of three
quantitative measures of complexity and are determined appropriate by the qualitative
measure of complexity are deemed appropriate for use on the exam.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Text Complexity Metrics for 2025 Grade 3 Passages
Word
Passage Title
Count elixeL
diacniK-hcselF
SOTA
Qualitative
Review
Excerpt from Sea View Star 640 610 3.5 3.7 Appropriate
Raccoons 571 620 4.5 5.3 Appropriate
Excerpt from Big Moon Tortilla 607 590 4.0 4.7 Appropriate
The North Wind and the Sun 213 n/a n/a n/a Appropriate
New York State 2025 Quantitative Text Complexity Chart for Assessment and Curriculum
To determine if a text’s quantitative complexity is at the appropriate grade level, New
York State uses the table below. In cases where a text is excerpted from a large work, only
the complexity of the excerpt that students see on the test is measured, not the large
work. It is therefore possible that the complexity of a book might be above or below grade
level, but the text used on the assessment will be at grade level. Because the
measurement of text complexity is inexact, quantitative measures of complexity are
defined by grade band rather than by individual grade level and then paired with the
qualitative review by an educator.
Degrees of
Grade Reading The Lexile Reading
Band ATOS Power Flesch-Kincaid Framework Maturity SourceRater
2nd–3rd 2.75 – 5.14 42 – 54 1.98 – 5.34 420 – 820 3.53 – 6.13 0.05 – 2.48
4th–5th 4.97 – 7.03 52 – 60 4.51 – 7.73 740 – 1010 5.42 – 7.92 0.84 – 5.75
6th–8th 7.00 – 9.98 57 – 67 6.51 – 10.34 925 – 1185 7.04 – 9.57 4.11 – 10.66
9th–10th 9.67 – 12.01 62 – 72 8.32 – 12.12 1050 – 1335 8.41 – 10.81 9.02 – 13.93
11th–12th 11.20 – 14.10 67 – 74 10.34 – 14.20 1185 – 1385 9.57 – 12.00 12.30 – 14.50
Source: Student Achievement Partners

--- PAGE 6 ---
GRADE 3 ELA SESSION 1
Name:
New York State
Testing Program
English Language Arts Test
Session 1
3
Grade
Spring 2025
RELEASED QUESTIONS
� NOISS3S '1"13 E 30W9

--- PAGE 7 ---
Excerpt from Sea View Star by Ali Bovis. Copyright © 2020 by ABDO Publishing Group. Used with permission of ABDO Publishing
Company-Magic Wagon via Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from Raccoons by Meryl Magby, 2013. Copyright © 2013 by The Rosen Publishing Group. Used with permission of The Rosen
Publishing Group, Inc. via Copyright Clearance Center.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by NWEA, a division of HMH, 14720 Energy Way,
Apple Valley, MN 55124. Copyright © 2025 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 1

--- PAGE 8 ---
Session 1
TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some ideas to help you do your best:
• Read the whole passage before you answer the questions. Most questions will only make
sense after you read the whole passage.
• You might need to read the passage more than once to answer a question.
• Read each question carefully. Take your time.
• A question may include a quote from a passage. You might need to review both the
quote and the whole passage to answer the question.
When you write your answers
• make sure to answer the whole question;
• use examples or details from the text;
• write in complete sentences; and
• use correct spelling, grammar, capitalization, and punctuation.
Session 1 Page 1

--- PAGE 9 ---
Read this story. Then answer questions 1 through 6.
Sylvie and Sammy’s teacher has announced that students will do a project
for “Make a Difference Day.” is means students will find a special way
to help others. Sylvie and Sammy are doing the project together.
Excerpt from Sea View Star
by Ali Bovis
1 Sylvie tapped Sammy’s shoulder and pointed to the swing set. ey
always got their best ideas on the swings. “Race you up!” She hopped on a
swing and pumped her legs. Sammy followed.
2 Sylvie tightened her grip and kicked in the air. “We need to do
something extra stellar for the animals.” . . .
3 “Hmm.” Sammy tilted his head. “I have a few ideas too. Maybe we can
look over our lists together.”
4 Sylvie knew Sammy would be full of awesome ideas. Sammy slowed his
swing and pulled out a piece of paper. He passed it to Sylvie.
5 “An art show to raise money for animals?” asked Sylvie, waving her list.
“I had the same idea! Here, number 139.”
6 “Number 139?” asked Sammy, his mouth opened wide. . . .
7 “Ready to start planning our art show for animals?” asked Sylvie. “Or
‘Paint Out!’ Sounds more stellar, doesn’t it?”
8 “Wait. What?” asked Sammy.
9 “e Paint Out. We can have it on Beach Street. People can paint
portraits of their pets outside the shops. en we can sell the paintings. We
can donate the money to the Sea View Animal Shelter.”
GO ON
Page 2 Session 1

--- PAGE 10 ---
10 “ey could help all the animals in Sea View,” said Sammy. . . .
11 ey got to work right away. Before dinner, they had gotten permission
from the town to hold the Paint Out, informed the Sea View Animal Shelter
of their upcoming “biggest donation ever,” and told friends and family to
save the date. . . .
12 With all that planning, the week had flown by. e paint, glitter, glue,
and sprinkles were gathered, ready to decorate the blank canvases. Make a
Difference Day was finally here! . . .
13 How could it be 6:15 in the morning already? Sylvie flung the door
open and pulled her best friend inside.
14 “Sammy, thank goodness. It’s getting late!”
15 Sammy looked at the clock. He made a confused face. “OK, we’re ready.
Mom and Dad squeezed in the supplies you brought over yesterday into the
car. And the booth for the dog.”
16 A smile spread across Sylvie’s face. “Ah, yes! You mean the booth for
my Make a Difference Day star! He’ll sit in his booth for everyone to see,
admire, and even paint!”
17 Sammy picked up the new boxes Sylvie had set out. “at sounds
great,” he said. He pointed to the photo album on top of the boxes. “I
brought some pictures of my pets that people can use as models.” . . .
18 Two hours later, Sylvie put down her glue and took in their work. She
and Sammy had transformed Beach Street into the biggest Paint Out party
in the history of Sea View.
19 Sylvie looked around. A balloon arch spelled “Happy Make a
Difference Day” from streetlight to streetlight. Paint-themed songs blasted
over speakers.
20 Blank canvases lined the street from Sea View Slices to Sea View
Scoops, and everything in between. Paint cans and buckets of brushes were
set out on a big table. Bowls of glitter, glue, and decorative rainbow sprinkles
sparkled in the morning light.
GO ON
Session 1 Page 3

--- PAGE 11 ---
21 People arrived by foot, car, and bus. And an occasional suroard.
22 When Sylvie’s family got there, she put them into position.
23 Sammy flipped his photo album to a picture of his bearded dragon and
turtle. “I think we’re ready,” he said.
24 “Just a few finishing touches,” Sylvie said. She ran to the booth and
fluffed the dog’s pillows. She wiped drool off his jowls. She colored chalk
stars on the street around him.
25 “Now?” Sammy asked.
26 Sylvie nodded. She squeezed in a few warm-up stretches and reached
for her megaphone. “Places, people! We’re open for business. Let the Paint
Out begin!” . . .
27 Before long, the Paint Out was in full swing. Empty canvases filled with
color. Rainbows swirled in water jars as paintbrushes were rinsed. Dogs,
cats, hamsters, and even a rat adorned the art of Sea View’s citizens.
GO ON
Page 4 Session 1

--- PAGE 12 ---
In paragraph 7, what does Sylvie mean when she says, “Sounds more stellar, doesn’t
1
it?”
A She wants people to think the event will be amazing.
B She wants people to be sure art is part of the event.
C She wants people to bring their own paint to the event.
D She wants people to know the event will help animals.
What do the details in paragraphs 2 and 9 show about Sylvie?
2
A She likes playing on the swings.
B She cares about animals.
C She knows a lot about the town.
D She is a talented artist.
Based on paragraph 14, why does Sammy make a confused face in paragraph 15?
3
A He is surprised that Sylvie thinks it is getting late.
B He is disappointed that Sylvie was ready before him.
C He is worried his parents did not pack everything.
D He is not sure why they need a booth for the dog.
GO ON
Session 1 Page 5

--- PAGE 13 ---
“Preparation is the key to success” is a common saying that means when you plan
4
for an event, it is more likely to go well. Which paragraph best shows how this idea
is demonstrated in the story?
A paragraph 1
B paragraph 3
C paragraph 11
D paragraph 15
Which detail best expresses a central idea of the story?
5
A “ ‘Hmm.’ Sammy tilted his head. ‘I have a few ideas too.’ ” (paragraph 3)
“en we can sell the paintings. We can donate the money to the Sea View
B
Animal Shelter.” (paragraph 9)
“Sylvie looked around. A balloon arch spelled ‘Happy Make a Difference
C
Day’ from streetlight to streetlight.” (paragraph 19)
“Sylvie nodded. She squeezed in a few warm-up stretches and reached for
D
her megaphone.” (paragraph 26)
By the end of the story, how does Sylvie most likely feel about the Paint Out?
6
A She is relieved that the planning and work are finished.
B She is upset because she did most of the work.
C She is concerned that they did not raise enough money.
D She is proud that the event was a huge success.
GO ON
Page 6 Session 1

--- PAGE 15 ---
Flexible Fingers
2 Raccoons have round bodies that are covered in thick brown or gray
fur. ey have black masks on their faces and black rings on their tails. ey
have four black paws. Raccoon paws have five fingers, just like a person’s
hands do. Adults tend to weigh between 10 and 30 pounds. ey are about 2
to 3 feet long from nose to tail.
3 Raccoons are very smart and quick. ey can use their flexible fingers
on their front paws to do things that most other animals cannot do. ese
include untying knots and turning doorknobs!
Eating Almost Anything
4 Raccoons are omnivores. is means they eat both plants and animals.
Exactly what a raccoon eats depends on where it lives. ey may eat fruits,
nuts, berries, seeds, eggs, insects, crayfish, frogs, fish, and turtles. Raccoons
sometimes even catch young gophers, squirrels, mice, and rats. Raccoons
living near people also eat pet food and garbage.
5 Raccoons look for food at night. ey use the many nerves on the
bottoms of their paws to feel their food. Raccoons oen dip their food in
water before they eat it. Scientists think that this soens the raccoons’ feet
and makes it easier for them to feel their food. . . .
GO ON
Session 1 Page 19

--- PAGE 16 ---
Night and Day
6 Raccoons are mostly nocturnal. is means that they rest during the
day and are active at night. Raccoons can be pests for people in
neighborhoods and cities. ey tip over trash cans, dig through gardens,
and pull down bird feeders looking for food. ey may hide or have babies
in places where they are not wanted, such as chimneys, attics, and
basements.
7 Raccoons keep safe from predators and people by hiding during the
day. However, they are sometimes killed by cougars, bobcats, coyotes, dogs,
owls, eagles, and snakes. ey also die from hunger, being hit by cars, or
getting sick.
Many Different Dens
8 Raccoons are thought to be solitary animals. is means adults spend
most of their time alone. Raccoons tend to stay within a home range of
about one square mile. In this home range, they have many hiding places
that they use as dens.
9 Unlike some other mammals, raccoons do not hibernate in the winter.
During the winter, they spend a lot of time in their dens, keeping warm.
However, they will leave their winter dens to find food if the weather is not
too cold. Sometimes many raccoons will share a large den to keep warm and
safe during a winter storm. . . .
GO ON
Page 20 Session 1

--- PAGE 17 ---
People and Raccoons
10 Raccoons are in no danger of dying out in the United States. In fact,
their numbers may be growing. is may be because they have adapted so
well to living in neighborhoods and cities near people.
11 You may see raccoons around your home at night. Raccoons can be fun
to watch, but you should never get too close. Raccoons can sometimes
spread diseases to people. If you like raccoons, try visiting them at a zoo or
looking for their tracks in a park!
GO ON
Session 1 Page 21

--- PAGE 18 ---
How does the graphic support the information in paragraph 2?
19
A by showing what raccoons look like
B by explaining that raccoons have good hearing
C by explaining that raccoons can see at night
D by showing where some raccoons live
Which sentence best explains why raccoons mostly come out at night?
20
A Raccoons find their food when it is dark.
B Raccoons spend most of their time alone.
C Raccoons hide during the day to keep safe.
D Raccoons have black masks and tail rings.
In which section would the reader find information about what raccoons do during
21
the winter?
A “Flexible Fingers”
B “Eating Almost Anything”
C “Night and Day”
D “Many Different Dens”
GO ON
Page 22 Session 1

--- PAGE 19 ---
Animals learn to do things a certain way because of their habitat. Which sentence
22
from the passage best connects to this idea?
“Raccoon paws have five fingers, just like a person’s hands do.”
A
(paragraph 2)
B “Exactly what a raccoon eats depends on where it lives.” (paragraph 4)
“ey use the many nerves on the bottoms of their paws to feel their food.”
C
(paragraph 5)
“In this home range, they have many hiding places that they use as dens.”
D
(paragraph 8)
Which detail from the passage best shows what the author thinks about raccoons?
23
A “Raccoons are very smart and quick.” (paragraph 3)
B “Raccoons living near people also eat pet food . . .” (paragraph 4)
C “Raccoons oen dip their food in water . . .” (paragraph 5)
D “Raccoons can sometimes spread diseases to people.” (paragraph 11)
GO ON
Session 1 Page 23

--- PAGE 20 ---
is question is worth 2 credits.
24
What does “pests” mean as it is used in paragraph 6? Use two details from the
passage to support your response.
is question is worth 2 credits.
25
What is a central idea of the passage? Use two details from the passage to support
your response.
STOP
Page 24 Session 1

--- PAGE 21 ---
Grade 3
English Language Arts Test
Session 1
Spring 2025

--- PAGE 22 ---
GRADE 3 ELA SESSION 2
Name:
New York State
Testing Program
English Language Arts Test
Session 2
3
Grade
Spring 2025
RELEASED QUESTIONS
Z NOISS3S '1"13 E 30W9

--- PAGE 23 ---
Excerpt from Big Moon Tortilla by Joy Cowley. Copyright © 1998 by Astra Publishing House, Ltd. Used with permission of Boyds Mill Press
via Copyright Clearance Center.
“The North Wind and the Sun” from You Read to Me, I’ll Read to You: Very Short Fables to Read Together by Mary Ann Hoberman.
Copyright © 2012 by Hachette Book Group, Inc. Used with permission of Little, Brown Books for Young Readers via Copyright Clearance
Center.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by NWEA, a division of HMH, 14720 Energy Way,
Apple Valley, MN 55124. Copyright © 2025 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 2

--- PAGE 24 ---
Session 2
TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some ideas to help you do your best:
• Read the whole passage before you answer the questions. Most questions will only
make sense after you read the whole passage.
• You might need to read the passage more than once to answer a question.
• Read each question carefully. Take your time.
• A question may include a quote from a passage. You might need to review both the
quote and the whole passage to answer the question.
When you write your answers
• make sure to answer the whole question;
• use examples or details from the text;
• write in complete sentences; and
• use correct spelling, grammar, capitalization, and punctuation.
Session 2 Page 1

--- PAGE 25 ---
Read this story. Then answer questions 26 through 31.
is story is about a girl named Marta and a lesson she learns.
Excerpt from Big Moon Tortilla
by Joy Cowley
1 Grandmother’s big moon tortillas were the best in the world!
2 e head of Marta Enos was filled with the knowing of fresh tortillas.
Oh, that sweet, crisp, little-bit-burnt smell! It went to Marta’s stomach,
which rumbled and growled, and then on down to her feet, making her toes
twitch towards the cookhouse.
3 e legs of Marta Enos would not wait another minute. ey were in
such a hurry to run to the cookhouse that they knocked over Marta’s table,
and that is when a disaster happened.
4 e homework papers with their neat writing and beautiful drawings
went out the window onto the breath of the fussing wind.
5 e wind huffed the papers high into the air. en, with a little cough,
it spread them over the village.
6 e legs of Marta Enos were sorry for their mistake, and they ran out
to chase the homework papers, which slipped and slid like kites without
string.
7 But the dogs, too, were chasing. Leaping into the air, they barked to
each other. A game! A game!
8 In no time at all, the beautiful homework papers were torn and chewed
into trash.
9 e second disaster happened when Marta tried to pull a page away
from a puppy. Her glasses fell off, and she stepped on them. One arm of her
glasses broke in half.
GO ON
Page 2 Session 2

--- PAGE 26 ---
10 She did not smell the tortillas anymore. Her head was filled up to her
eyes with grief and tears as hot as chili peppers. Ruined homework! Broken
glasses! Marta Enos ran to Grandmother.
11 Grandmother le her tortillas and sat down, as big as a bed and warm
from the cooking. As she smoothed Marta’s hair with her floured hands, she
said, “Hush! Hush! If you cry so much you’ll put out the fire.”
12 “e dogs ate my homework, and I can’t see to do any more!” Marta
sobbed.
13 Grandmother rocked her. “Little problems,” she said. “Too small for a
big rainstorm. We’ll repair your eyeglasses.”
14 But the tears of Marta Enos still ran through her eyes and nose and
made hiccups in her throat.
15 So Grandmother sang to her an old healing song, and with the healing
song there was a story.
16 “When we have a problem we must choose what we will be. Sometimes
it is good to be a tree, to stand up tall in the desert and look all ways at
once.”
17 “Sometimes it is best to be a rock, to sit very still, seeing nothing and
saying nothing.”
18 “Sometimes when you have a problem, you have to be a strong
mountain lion, fierce and ready to fight for what is right.”
19 “Sometimes the wisest thing is to be an eagle and fly. When the eagle is
high up, it sees how small the earth is. It sees how small the problem is, and
it laughs and laughs.”
20 Grandmother wound some tape around the arm of the glasses. She put
the glasses back on the nose and ears of Marta Enos. “at should be OK
until we get them fixed,” she said. “Now, one tortilla before supper?”
GO ON
Session 2 Page 3

--- PAGE 27 ---
21 Grandmother pinched a ball of dough and slapped it between her
hands, flip-flap, flip-flap, flip-flap. When it was as big and pale as a rising full
moon, she dropped it onto the iron plate above the red-hot coals of the fire.
22 Ah, the smell as the tortilla bubbled and browned!
23 “I have decided,” said Marta Enos, her legs doing a tortilla dance. “I am
going to be the eagle.”
24 Grandmother nodded. “at is very wise,” she said, turning the tortilla
over. “Fly high and laugh. en come back and do your homework.”
GO ON
Page 4 Session 2

--- PAGE 28 ---
Why is the information in paragraph 3 important to the story?
26
A It shows the cause of a problem in the story.
B It gives details about the setting.
C It gives a hint about how the story will end.
D It introduces a new character.
Which meaning of the word “spread” is used in paragraph 5?
27
A scattered around
B grew slowly
C became known
D shared freely
Which detail from the story best tells why Marta begins crying?
28
A “It went to Marta’s stomach . . .” (paragraph 2)
“ey were in such a hurry to run to the cookhouse that they knocked over
B
Marta’s table . . .” (paragraph 3)
“But the dogs, too, were chasing. Leaping into the air, they barked to each
C
other. A game!” (paragraph 7)
D “Ruined homework! Broken glasses!” (paragraph 10)
GO ON
Session 2 Page 5

--- PAGE 29 ---
Which detail from the story best tells what Grandmother believes?
29
“Grandmother’s big moon tortillas were the best in the world!”
A
(paragraph 1)
“When we have a problem we must choose what we will be.”
B
(paragraph 16)
C “When the eagle is high up, it sees how small the earth is.” (paragraph 19)
“Grandmother wound some tape around the arm of the glasses.”
D
(paragraph 20)
What does Marta most likely think about Grandmother’s healing song?
30
A It reminds her of a story.
B It helps her make a choice.
C It makes her want to dance.
D It teaches her about animals.
Which detail would be most important to include in a summary of the story?
31
A Marta’s stomach makes loud noises.
B e tortillas are in the cookhouse.
C e tortillas bubble and turn brown.
D Marta decides to be like an eagle.
GO ON
Page 6 Session 2

--- PAGE 30 ---
Read this poem. Then answer questions 32 through 34.
e North Wind and the Sun
by Mary Ann Hoberman
I’m the North Wind.
I am cold. I am strong.
No one can beat me
When I come along.
5 I am the Sun.
I am gentle and warm.
at gives me more power
an coldness or storm.
Silly old Sun,
10 You are not very bright!
Let’s have a contest
To see who is right.
Look down below,
At that bundled-up man.
15 Make him take off his coat
If you can.
GO ON
Session 2 Page 7

--- PAGE 31 ---
Of course I can do that!
I’ll raise up a squall
And blow off his coat
20 With no trouble at all.
e more that you blow, Wind,
And show off your might,
e more the man shivers
And pulls his coat tight.
shivers = shakes because of being cold
25 Well you go and try
Since you think you’re so hot!
But if I can’t do it,
You surely cannot.
GO ON
Page 8 Session 2

--- PAGE 32 ---
I’ll come out right now
30 From behind this big cloud
And warm the man up.
Look! He’s laughing out loud!
So what if he’s laughing
And you’re shining bright!
35 He’s still got his coat on.
It’s still pulled up tight.
But look at him now!
ough I don’t want to gloat,
I have made him so hot,
40 He’s unbuttoned his coat!
gloat = brag
GO ON
Session 2 Page 9

--- PAGE 33 ---
He has taken it off!
You have beaten me, Sun!
So I have, silly Wind!
You have lost! I have won!
GO ON
Page 10 Session 2

--- PAGE 34 ---
is question is worth 2 credits.
32
In “e North Wind and the Sun,” what do lines 9 through 12 show about the
North Wind? Use two details from the poem to support your response.
is question is worth 2 credits.
33
In “e North Wind and the Sun,” how does the Sun feel about having power? Use
two details from the poem to support your response.
GO ON
Session 2 Page 11

--- PAGE 35 ---
is question is worth 2 credits.
34
In the poem, how do the Sun and the North Wind show that they are alike? Use two
details from the poem to support your response.
STOP
Page 12 Session 2

--- PAGE 36 ---
Grade 3
English Language Arts Test
Session 2
Spring 2025

--- PAGE 37 ---
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
2025 English Language Arts Tests Map to the Standards
Grade 3
Multiple Choice
Constructed-Response Questions
Questions
Question Type Key Points Standard Strand Subscore Percentage of Students P-Value
Average
Who Answered Correctly (Average Points Earned ÷
Points Earned
(P-Value) Total Possible Points)
Session 1
1 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.4 Reading Standards for Literature Reading 0.48
2 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.3 Reading Standards for Literature Reading 0.82
3 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.3 Reading Standards for Literature Reading 0.71
4 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.9 Reading Standards for Literature Reading 0.57
5 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.2 Reading Standards for Literature Reading 0.68
6 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.6 Reading Standards for Literature Reading 0.74
19 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.7 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading 0.74
20 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.3 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading 0.36
21 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.5 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading 0.60
22 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.9 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading 0.41
23 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.6 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading 0.67
24 Constructed Response n/a 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.4 Reading Standards for Informational Text Writing from Sources 1.06 0.53
25 Constructed Response n/a 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.2 Reading Standards for Informational Text Writing from Sources 1.20 0.60
Session 2
26 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.5 Reading Standards for Literature Reading 0.77
27 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.L.4 Language Standards Reading 0.74
28 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.3 Reading Standards for Literature Reading 0.78
29 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.8 Reading Standards for Literature Reading 0.50
30 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.6 Reading Standards for Literature Reading 0.51
31 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.2 Reading Standards for Literature Reading 0.54
32 Constructed Response n/a 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.3 Reading Standards for Literature Writing from Sources 1.04 0.52
33 Constructed Response n/a 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.6 Reading Standards for Literature Writing from Sources 1.20 0.60
34 Constructed Response n/a 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-3.R.3 Reading Standards for Literature Writing from Sources 1.02 0.51
*This item map is intended to identify the primary analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question on the 2025 operational ELA test. However, each constructed-response question measures proficiencies described in multiple
standards, including writing and additional reading and language standards. For example, the two-point constructed-response questions require students to first conduct the analyses described in the mapped standard and then produce
written responses that are rated based on writing standards. To gain greater insight into the measurement focus for constructed-response questions, please refer to the rubrics shown in the Educator Guides.

